README.md, before:

# MCMC-Iterators: Markov Chain Monte Carlo Iterators
Iterator-based Markov Chain Monte Carlo Sampling Algorithms

## Why this package?
Packages like pymc3, pyro, and stan trap you within their modeling world. Sometimes you just want a quick and easy sampling approach that takes a minimal amount of overhead. This package is created so that all you need to provide is a user-defined distribution (log density) from which you would like to sample. This is just a standard python function and does not trap you into any specific code-base. The algorithms in this package allow you to then create a loop generating samples, just like a regular loop in python. You can do whatever you want with the samples. 

The currently implemented MCMC algorithms include
* Random Walk Metropolis Hastings (MH)
* Adaptive Metropolis (AM)
* Delayed Rejection Metropolis Hastings  (DR)
* Delayed Rejection Adaptive Metropolis (DRAM) 
    
    
## Example

To show you the ease of use of this package, lets use DRAM to generate samples from a simple 2D gaussian.
First you construct a function to evaluate the logpdf of a shifted and skewed Gaussian

    def gauss_logpdf(x):
        cov = np.array([[1.0, 0.2], 
                        [0.2, 2.0]])
        mean = np.array([1.0, 2.0])
        
        diff = x - mean
        return -0.5 * np.dot(diff,  np.linalg.solve(cov, diff))
        
Next we setup the sampler. For the initial sample we will use a zero vector and for the initial covariance the identity. Though you can use whatever you want, and this package does include some code for computing a Laplace Approximation.


    init_sample = np.array([0.0, 0.0])
    init_cov = np.array([[1.0, 0.0], 
                         [0.0, 1.0]])
                         
Finally, we setup the DRAM sampler, here I expose all the parameters. In practice you can use the defaults.
    
    sampler = DelayedRejectionAdaptiveMetropolis(gauss_logpdf, init_sample, init_cov,
                                                 adapt_start=10,
                                                 eps=1e-6, sd=None,
                                                 interval=1, level_scale=1e-1)


This is now a simple iterator. So you can iterate forever with

    for sample, logpdf, accepted_bool in sampler:
        print(f"Sample: {sample}")
        print(f"\t Logpdf: {logpdf}")
        print(f"\t Accepted? -> {accepted_bool}")
        print("\n")
        
Notice that the sampler outputs three things: the next sample, the evaluation of the logpdf, and whether or not this is a new sample that was accepted (True) or an old sample wjere a new sample was proposed, but rejected (False)

One can use this iterator in conjuction with any itertools functions. For instance the following function turns this iterator into one with a finite number of samples (100)

    sampler = itertools.islice(sampler, 100)
    
One can also extract just the samples, rather than the logpdf values and whether or not it is an accepted sample via

    sampler = itertools.starmap(lambda x, y, z: x, sampler)
    
Finally, one could put the samples into a pandas dataframe as follows

    df = pd.DataFrame(samples, columns=['x1', 'x2'])
    
For more examples please checkout the [banana function](examples/banana.py)

## Installation

This package omes with both a library and some examples. The library must be installed prior to running the examples. To install the library, one can run the following commands

	python setup.py build
	python setup.py install

## Unit testing

To run unit tests one can run

    python -m unittest discover

from the top level directory.

## Information
author: Alex Gorodetsky  
email:  alex@alexgorodetsky.com  
license: GPL3  
copyright (c) 2022, Alex Gorodetsky

Commit message:

Add sampler state to outputs

README.md, after:

# MCMC-Iterators: Markov Chain Monte Carlo Iterators
Iterator-based Markov Chain Monte Carlo Sampling Algorithms

## Why this package?
Packages like pymc3, pyro, and stan trap you within their modeling world. Sometimes you just want a quick and easy sampling approach that takes a minimal amount of overhead. This package is created so that all you need to provide is a user-defined distribution (log density) from which you would like to sample. This is just a standard python function and does not trap you into any specific code-base. The algorithms in this package allow you to then create a loop generating samples, just like a regular loop in python. You can do whatever you want with the samples. 

The currently implemented MCMC algorithms include
* Random Walk Metropolis Hastings (MH)
* Adaptive Metropolis (AM)
* Delayed Rejection Metropolis Hastings  (DR)
* Delayed Rejection Adaptive Metropolis (DRAM) 
    
    
## Example

To show you the ease of use of this package, lets use DRAM to generate samples from a simple 2D gaussian.
First you construct a function to evaluate the logpdf of a shifted and skewed Gaussian

    def gauss_logpdf(x):
        cov = np.array([[1.0, 0.2], 
                        [0.2, 2.0]])
        mean = np.array([1.0, 2.0])
        
        diff = x - mean
        return -0.5 * np.dot(diff,  np.linalg.solve(cov, diff))
        
Next we setup the sampler. For the initial sample we will use a zero vector and for the initial covariance the identity. Though you can use whatever you want, and this package does include some code for computing a Laplace Approximation.


    init_sample = np.array([0.0, 0.0])
    init_cov = np.array([[1.0, 0.0], 
                         [0.0, 1.0]])
                         
Finally, we setup the DRAM sampler, here I expose all the parameters. In practice you can use the defaults.
    
    sampler = DelayedRejectionAdaptiveMetropolis(gauss_logpdf, init_sample, init_cov,
                                                 adapt_start=10,
                                                 eps=1e-6, sd=None,
                                                 interval=1, level_scale=1e-1)


This is now a simple iterator. So you can iterate forever with

    for sample, logpdf, accepted_bool, state in sampler:
        print(f"Sample: {sample}")
        print(f"\t Logpdf: {logpdf}")
        print(f"\t Accepted? -> {accepted_bool}")
        print(f"\t Proposed sample: {state.proposed_samples[0]}")
        print(f"\t Proposed logpdf: {state.proposed_logpdfs[0]}")
        print(f"\t Proposal covariance: {state.cov}")
        print("\n")
        
Notice that the sampler outputs for things: the next sample, the evaluation of the logpdf, whether or not this is a new sample that was accepted (True) or an old sample where a new sample was proposed, but rejected (False), and the sampler state.
This last variable in turn contains the proposed sample (or samples, in the case of delayed-rejection methods), the proposed logpdf(s), and the covariance of the proposal distribution.

One can use this iterator in conjuction with any itertools functions. For instance the following function turns this iterator into one with a finite number of samples (100)

    sampler = itertools.islice(sampler, 100)
    
One can also extract just the samples, rather than the logpdf values and whether or not it is an accepted sample via

    sampler = itertools.starmap(lambda x, y, z, s: x, sampler)
    
Finally, one could put the samples into a pandas dataframe as follows

    df = pd.DataFrame(samples, columns=['x1', 'x2'])
    
For more examples please checkout the [banana function](examples/banana.py)

## Installation

This package omes with both a library and some examples. The library must be installed prior to running the examples. To install the library, one can run the following commands

	python setup.py build
	python setup.py install

## Unit testing

To run unit tests one can run

    python -m unittest discover

from the top level directory.

## Information
author: Alex Gorodetsky  
email:  alex@alexgorodetsky.com  
license: GPL3  
copyright (c) 2022, Alex Gorodetsky
